In this concept, we will talk about type conversion in solidity.
All programming languages support some kind of type conversion,
and so does solidity.
There are two types of type conversions available to us,
implicit conversion and explicit conversion.
Implicit conversion.
Let's talk about that. The compiler will attempt to convert
from one type to another type if there is no loss of data.
If there is potential loss of data that means,
if we are trying to convert a variable from uint32 to uint8,
there will be loss of data, right?
This is when the compiler will give you an error.
But if we're trying to convert uint8 to uint32,
the compiler will not complain since there will be no loss of data.
Let's look at some examples in front of you.
In the first example,
uint8 a is equal to 255 is going to work
fine since uint8 can hold one byte of information,
hence it can hold numbers up to 255.
In the second example uint8 is equal to 256,
the compiler will give an error since one byte cannot hold a number greater than 255.
In the third example,
we have int8 a is equal to 255 then we have int c. Now remember,
whenever you do not mention a number,
int c means int 256 c. Then we are doing c is equal to a.
This is going to compile perfectly fine without any errors since int c
means int 256 that means it can easily hold a byte of information.
Let's look at some more examples on your screen.
In the first example here,
we are declaring a as uint 256,
then we are declaring b as uint8.
Then we're trying to do b is equal to a.
We are trying to put the value of a in b.
This will give us a compile error since b cannot hold or
b can actually hold only eight bits and it cannot accommodate larger numbers.
In the next example,
we're trying to have a Boolean expression in
the brackets and they're doing if brackets one.
So, we're evaluating an expression with the if statement.
Now, in some languages,
one will evaluate to true but not in solidity.
You need to explicitly give an expression.
So, this is going to feel since one cannot implicitly convert to true.
In the next example,
if one greater than zero,
now this is going to pass since the condition is now evaluated to true.
Now, let's talk about explicit conversion.
You can explicitly tell the compiler to convert from one type to another type.
There could be potential loss of information and you are aware of that.
In the next example that you see on the screen,
we have a 32-bit number then we have a 24-bit number.
Implicitly, if you try to store the 32-bit number in the 24-bit number,
we are trying as we're trying to do in the second line,
the compiler will give an error.
But you can explicitly convert the 32-bit number to a 24-bit number by
enclosing it in a bracket like on
the third line and this is going to work perfectly fine.
Let's look at some more examples for type conversion now.
So, let's look at this simple example for type conversion.
So, a very simple contract not really supposed to do anything
just show you and explain you some type conversions in our language.
CPC, it starts with a pragma line,
solidity version that we're using right here and then
word contract declares that this is a contract and then the name of the contract.
Now, within that, all these variables that are outside
any function automatically they become storage variables.
So, we have the first variable which is
a one byte unsigned integer because it says uint8,
and then we have a uint 256 because it doesn't see anything and other variable.
Now, inside the function,
which is the name of the function is conversion and we have int b
which means it is a 256 bits or a 32 byte signed integer.
Then we're trying to do b is equal to a.
Now, this is going to compile successfully because
a 8bytes type can easily fit into 32byte information, right?
But the next statement is going to give you
an error and I'm going to show you by uncommenting this.
So, if you see the compiler throws a red arrow right there,
that shows that this is not going to work,
so I'm going to comment it back.
In the next line, if you see I'm actually explicitly converting
b to uint8 and then storing it to a.
Now, this is going to work perfectly fine because we
are doing an explicit conversion in this example.
All of these sample contracts are
going to be available on our GitHub page so you can download them,
play with them, and really get comfortable with all of these different concepts.